{\rtf1\mac\ansicpg10000\cocoartf102
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica-Bold;\f1\fswiss\fcharset77 Helvetica;\f2\froman\fcharset77 Times-Roman;
}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;\red255\green0\blue0;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww15520\viewh18940\viewkind0
\pard\tx560\tx1120\tx1680\tx2240\tx2800\tx3360\tx3920\tx4480\tx5040\tx5600\tx6160\tx6720\ql\qnatural

\f0\b\fs36 \cf0 Oscar Wilde Project Notes
\fs24 \

\f1\b0 \
\

\f0\b\fs36 \cf2 Note to Cynthia:
\f1\b0  Due to a lack of any published criticism of Oscar Wilde's poetic works I was unable to include an evaluation of Wilde's work by other critics. Any published criticism I was able to find was focused upon Wilde's books and plays.\

\fs24 \cf0 \
\

\f0\b Review books in the following order:
\f1\b0 \
1. H. Montgomery Hyde 'The Annotated Oscar Wilde', New York: Clarkson N. Potter Inc., 1982, pp (7-34, 330)\
2. Barry Day, 'Oscar Wilde, A Life in Quotes', London: Metro Books, 2000, pp (
\f2 30, 33-34, 36, 38, 42, 57, 289
\f1 )\

\f0\b *Not Bothering with this* 
\f1\b0 3. Karl Beckson 'I Can Resist Everything Except Temptation and other Quotations from Oscar Wilde', New York: Columbia University Press, pp (pages)\
4. Harper Collins Publishers 'Collins Complete Works of Oscar Wilde, Centenary Edition', Glasgow: HarperCollingsPublishers 1948, 1966, 1994, pp (867, 874)\
5. Rupert Hart-Davis, 'The Letters of Oscar Wilde', London: Rupert Hart-Davis, 1962, pp (423-517 & Misc)\

\f0\b *Not Bothering with this, this is only a book of HIS criticism of others work* 
\f1\b0 6. Stanley Weintraub, 'Literary Criticism of Oscar Wilde', USA: University of Nebraska Press, 1968, pp (pages)\

\f0\b *All Criticism is based on his theatrical work, useless.*
\f1\b0  7.ref Regina Gagnier 'Critical Essays on Oscar Wilde', New York: Macmillan Publishing Company, 1991, pp (pages)\
\
8. Oscar Wilde - Top Biography http://top-biography.com/9075-Oscar%20Wild/\
\
Resoning for the above order is so that I can get a general understanding of Oscar Wilde the person. By gaining a better understanding of his life and hardships, I can gain more insight into his poetry. Therefore, I will start by reading about his life, his quotations, and his trials. Then I will move on to his poetry. After going through some of his poetry I will read some of his letters and criticism of him.\
\

\f0\b Oscar Wilde - Biography
\f1\b0 \
Full Name: Oscar Fingal O'Flahertie Wills Wilde\
Place of Birth: 21 Westland Row, Dublin\
Date of Birth: October 16th, 1854\
Date of Death: November 30th,  1900\
Father: Sir William Robert Wills Wilde (1821-1876)\
Mother: Jane Francesca Agnes Elgee (1820-96)\
Married: May 29, 1884\
Wife: Constance Lloyd (1858-98)\
\
His father was a popular eye and ear surgeon in the Irish capital, founder of a hospital there, and author of a work which remained the standard text book on aural surgery for many years. He held the honorary appointment of Surgeon Oculist in Ordinary to Queen Victoria, and he was knighted largely for his work on the medical statistics of the Irish census, an appropriate honor in view of his own unorthodox efforts to increase the local population.\
\
His father was a compulsive woman chaser and he had several natural children. Oscar was the younger of his father's two legitimate sons, the elder, William Charles Kingsbury, having been born two years previously. 'Willie' was to become a journalist in London and to die in 1898 at the comparatively young age of 46.\
\
His mother was the daughter of an Irish country solicitor from Wexford; she liked to believe that her maiden name was a corruption of the Italian Alighieri and she claimed kinship with the poet Dante.\
\
Wilde studied at Portora Royal School, Enniskillen, County Fermanagh (1864-71), Trinity College, Dublin (1871-74) and Magdalen College, Oxford (1874-78), where he was taught by Walter Patewr and John Ruskin. In Oxford Wilde shocked the pious dons with his irreverent attitude towards religion and was jeered at his eccentric clothes. He collected blue china and peacock's feathers, and later his velvet knee-breeches drew much attention.\
\
In 1878 Wilde received his B.A. and on the same year he moved to London. His lifestyle and humourous wit made him soon spokesman for Aestheticism, the late 19th century movement in England that advocated art for art's sake. He worked as art reviewer (1881), lectured in the United States and Canada (1882), and lived in Paris (1883). Between the years 1883 and 1884 he lectured in Britain. From the mid-1880s he was regular contributor for Pall Mall Gazette and Dramatic View. In 1884 Wilde married Constance Lloyd (died 1898) and to support his family Wilde edited in 1887-89 Woman's World magazine. In 1888 he published The Happy Prince and Other Tales, fairy-stories written for his two sons. The Picture of Dorian Gray followed in 1890 and next year he brought out more fairy tales. The marriage ended in 1893. Wilde had met an few years earlier Lord Alfred Douglas ('Bosie'), an athlete and a poet, who became both the love of the author's life and his downfall. \
\
From his days in Oxford, he always wanted to be famous or notorious\
\
He graduated from Oxford university in 1878 and moved to London, where he achieved early celebrity and notoriety.\
In 1882 he visited America for a lengthy successful lecture tour.\
\
On May 29, 1884 Oscar married Constance Lloyd in London. Of her, he had once told a friend "...she knows I am the greatest poet, so in literature she is all right." 2 Sons soon followed, Cyril in 1885 and Vyvyan in 1886. Soon after the birth of his second son, Wilde quipped that they were thinking of calling him Nothing--"as then it can be said that he is Nothing Wilde."\
\

\f0\b The Poet:\

\f1\b0 During 1875-1876 Oscar published poetry in several literary magazines. In 1876 he found himself back in Ireland after the death of his father left the family with several debts. It was there that Oscar had a brief romantic affair with a girl named Florence Balcome, who later married Bram Stoker. In 1878, Wilde continued writing poetry in earnest, and won the coveted Newdigate Prize for English poetry with Ravenna. He soon left Oxford to build himself a reputation among the literati in London. \
\
'Poetry should be like a crystal,' Wilde wrote to his friend Graham Robertson, the artist and theatrical costume designer, who was trying to write a sonnet; 'it should make life more beautiful and less real.'\
\
As a result of his prison term he wrote one of his most well-known poems called 'The Ballad of Reading Gaol'.\
\
His poetic output was was largely the literary effort of youth, often immature and not fully developed. The fact that Wilde's poems are almost entirely confined to the youthful period of his life probably accounts for the fact that so little of his relatively large poetic output has been included in anthologies. But the little that has thus appeared has significantly been chosen by such leading literary authorities as W.B. Yeats and Sir Arthur Quiller-Couch.\
\
The first volume of Wilde's poetic works appeared in 1881, which had a mixed reception from reviewers.\
\

\f0\b The Lecturer:\

\f1\b0 During the 1880's Wilde would establish himself as a writer, poet, and lecturer, but above all as a "Professor of Aesthetics". In late 1881, after publishing the volume Poems at his own expense, he began a lecture tour of the United States. A well-known Wilde anecdote states that at customs upon his entry to America, when asked if he had anything to declare, Oscar replied: "Nothing but my genius." Sporting knee-breeches, velvet coat, long hair and lace cuffs, Wilde would often give up to six lectures per week, speaking of the "Principles of Aestheticism" with a poetic grace: \
\
On a stop in Leadville, Colorado, Wilde remarked that a saloon sign stating "Please do not shoot the pianist. He is doing his best." demonstrated "the only rational method of art criticism I have ever come across." While in the states, Oscar also met various artists and writers, including Walt Whitman and Henry Wadsworth Longfellow. The American tour, from the east to the west coast, helped establish Wilde as an expert on "matters of art and taste".\
\
\

\f0\b The Playwright:
\f1\b0 \
Wilde made his reputation in theatre world between the years 1892 and 1895 with a series of highly popular plays. Lady Wintermere's Fan (1892) dealt with a blackmailing divorc\'8ee driven to self-sacrifice by maternal love. In A Woman of No Importance (1893) an illegitime son is torn between his father and mother. An Ideal Husband (1895) dealt with blackmail, political corruption and public and private honour. The Importance of Being Earnest (1895) was about two fashionable young gentlemen and their eventually successful courtship.\
\
Wilde wrote and published nearly all of his major work in the 1890's. His only novel, The Picture of Dorian Gray was published in 1890. It was followed by Intentions (1891), and later in the same year, two volumes of stories and fairy tales also appeared; Lord Arthur Savile's Crime, Other Stories and A House of Pomegranates.\
\
Wilde's greatest successes were his social comedies or plays. His most successful were Lady Windermere's Fan (1892), A Woman of No Importance (1893), An Ideal Husband (1895) and The Importance of Being Earnest (1895). Adroit plots and witty dialogue characterized all of these plays. Oscar Wilde had a natural talent in writing for the stage, which was emphasized by his gift for farce. This is shown in the numerous paradoxical quotes he is known for. Almost all of Oscar's work was characterized with a central plot of a secret sin that would later turn to disgrace the character.\
\
Oscar was at the peak of his career in 1895, it was then that his life took a drastic twist and he himself imitated the main character in many of his plays. \
\

\f0\b Circumstances of Arrest:\

\f1\b0 In the summer of 1891, Wilde first met Lord Alfred Douglas, the son of the Marquis of Queensberry and an undergraduate at Oxford. His resulting relationship with Alfred, nicknamed "Bosie", was to alter the course of the rest of his life. Although Douglas later maintained that they had never committed sodomy, whispers were circulating in London Society of Wilde's homosexual tendencies and practices. Over time he had grown increasingly reckless about secretive liaisons with stableboys, clerks and servants, leaving himself open to frequent blackmailing attempts. Oscar was also turning to alcohol and his friends write of often seeing him in an intoxicated state. \

\f0\b \

\f1\b0 For the last two years, Wilde's primary love-interest had been Lord Alfred "Bosie" Douglas. Bosie's father, unfortunately, was a severely repressed and repressive individual, best remembered as the originator of the "Marquess of Queensbury rules" in boxing. The Marquess was livid over his son's relationship with Wilde, and determined to bring Wilde down.\
\
His first plan had been to disrupt the premiere of Earnest, but Wilde having gotten wind of this, the Marquess was denied entrance. So a few days later, on February 18, he left a calling card at Wilde's club, with the note: "To Oscar Wilde posing Somdomite".\
\
Perhaps if Wilde had ignored this, it might have resolved itself without any great tragedy... but more likely Wilde knew that Queensbury was not going to let the matter drop, so unwisely, at Bosie's urging, he swore out a warrant on March 1 for the arrest of Queensbury, for libel.\
The trial was set for April 3, with Queensbury represented by a college acquaintance of Wilde's-- Edward Carson. A day or two before the trial, Wilde was appalled to learn that the defense had come up with ten names of boys Wilde had (supposedly) solicited, along with some letters he'd written Bosie.\
\
Wilde took the stand on the first day, and at first delighted the court with his wit. (Carson reads a verse from an essay of Wilde's, and asks, "And I suppose you wrote that also, Mr Wilde?" "Ah no, Mr Carson, Shakespeare wrote that...")\
\
But gradually, Carson zeroed in on his target, and gained the upper hand. The tide's turning reduced Wilde to: "You sting me and insult me and try to unnerve me; and at times one says things flippantly when one ought to speak more seriously. I admit it..."\
\
Queensbury was not just exonerated, the judge instructed the jury to find him justified in calling Wilde a sodomite in public. Having lost, Wilde's friends unanimously recommended he flee the country, because arrest seemed inevitable, but Wilde's pride would not allow it, and on the fifth of April he was arrested and jailed.\
\
During April, Wilde faced a series of preliminary hearings, in which new evidence was introduced by various hotel employees testifying about Wilde's bedpartners, and the fecal stains found on his sheets! But the trial ended in a hung jury, and a second trial had to be scheduled for May 22.\
\
Having been released on 5000 pounds bail on May 7, Wilde again had the opportunity to flee, and chose not to. On May 25, the jury found him guilty, and the judge declared, "People who can do these things must be dead to all sense of shame... It is the worst case I have ever tried.... I shall, under such circumstances, be expected to pass the severest sentence that the law allows. In my judgement it is totally inadequate for such a case as this. The sentence of the Court is that... you be imprisoned and kept to hard labour for two years."\
\
After leaving jail, Wilde immigrated to France, where he lived the last three years of his life under an assumed name,  Sebastian Melmoth.\
\

\f0\b Death:\

\f1\b0 In the years after his release Wilde's health deteriorated, and in 1900 he underwent an operation to attempt to fix middle ear problems which had been exacerbated from a fall in his prison cell. After the operation in October he remained bedridden and soon developed an abscess in the ear which led to cerebral meningitis. He died in Paris on November 30 at the age of forty-six, after being semi-comatose for days. Yet he could not leave this world without a last dose of his characteristic wit, quipping about the shabby wallpaper in his room: "One of us had to go."\

\f0\b \

\f1\b0 After being buried first at Bagneux, his remains were moved in 1909 to Pere Lachaise in Paris where a large winged stone figure adorns his grave, inscribed with lines from The Ballad of Reading Gaol:\
And alien tears will fill for him\
Pity's long broken urn.\
For his mourners will be outcast,\
And outcasts always mourn men.\
\
Despite his undignified end, today Wilde is enjoying a resurgence in popularity. Perhaps it is society's attempt to redeem itself for those who condemned this brilliant man to ruin. Wilde has been portrayed on stage and in a film biography. His An Ideal Husband was recently released as a major motion picture and a new sculpture in London was dedicated to his memory. Oscar Wilde walked the line between insider and outsider, balancing a conflicting public and private life in anti-homosexual late Victorian society--a precarious situation which led to disaster. \
\
He died of an ear infection on November 30th, 1900. Wilde is buried in Paris.\
\

\f0\b 2. Oscar Wilde, A Life in Quotes
\f1\b0 \
\

\f0\b America:
\f1\b0 \
\
"I have nothing to declare but my genius." Wilde's supposed statement to US Customs officials on his arrival in the country. (p.30)\
\
"I have several secretaries. One writes my autographs [he would later claim that his one had to go to the hospital with writer's cramps] - the other receives the flowers that are left really every ten minutes. A third whose hair resembles mine is obliged to send off locks of his own hair to the myriad of maidens of the city, and so is rapidly becomming bald..." Letter to Mrs George Lewis (p.33-34)\
\
"I only saw one reposeful American - a wooden figure outside a tobacco shop." (p.36)\
\
"A remarkable characteristic of the Americans is the manner in which they have applied science to modern life." But he later added with ecological perception: "Why does science not clean the streets and free the rivers from pollution?" (p.37-38)\
\
Wilde wrote 'I think him genuine, honest and manly' of Walt Witman, which was a strange use of words, since Whitman was a well-known homosexual. "One of the first things I said was that he call me 'Oscar'. 'I like that so much,' he answered, laying his hand on my knee." (p.42)\
\

\f0\b Wilde on Wilde:
\f1\b0 \
\
"I love him and have always loved him. He ruined my life, and for that very reason I seem forced to love him more... and I think that now I shall do lovely work." Letter to Reggie Turner (p.289)\
\

\f0\b Paris and Abroad:\
\

\f1\b0 To Frank Harris on the subject of the lugubrious Paris gendarmes:\
"Giving wrong directions to English tourists is the only thing that consoles them." (p.57)\
\

\f0\b 4. Collins Complete Works of Oscar Wilde\

\f1\b0 \

\f0\b Poem #1 (p.867)\
The Harlot's House\

\f1\b0 \
We caught the tread of dancing feet,\
We loitered down the moonlit street,\
And stopped beneath the harlot's house.\
\
Inside, above the din and fray,\
We heard the loud musicians play\
The 'Treues Liebes Herz' of Strauss.\
\
Like strange mechanical grotesques,\
Making fantastic arabesques,\
The shadows raced across the blind.\
\
We watched the ghostly dancers spin\
To sound of horn and violin,\
Like black leaves wheeling in the wind.\
\
Like wire-pulled automatons,\
Slim silhouetted skeletons\
Went sidling through the slow quadrille,\
\
Then took each other by the hand,\
And danced a stately saraband;\
Their laughter echoed thin and shrill.\
\
Sometimes a clockwork puppet pressed\
A phantom lover to her breast,\
Sometimes they seemed to try to sing.\
\
Sometimes a horrible marionette\
Came out, and smoked its cigarette\
Upon the steps like a live thing.\
\
Then, turning to my love, I said,\
'The dead are dancing with the dead,\
The dust is whirling with the dust.'\
\
But she - she heard the violin,\
And left my side, and entered in:\
Love passed into the house of lust.\
\
Then suddenly the tune went false,\
The dancers wearied of the waltz,\
The shadows ceased to wheel and whirl.\
\
And down the long and silent street,\
The dawn, with silver-sandalled feet,\
Crept like a frightened girl. \
\

\f0\b Notes:
\f1\b0 \
Rhyming Triplet in the form of aab\
\
Written during Wilde's three-month stay in Paris during 1881, it was not published until 1885. It may have been inspired by a local prostitute with whom he spent the night.\
\
wilde constructs a very mechanical house.  the characters in it are almost\
puppets.\
love enters the house of lust, and the system crumbles...changes.  this can\
be seen as a parallel to wilde's opinion of art in general.\
        Art is love  --  lust is reality\
        love changes the house of lust  --  art changes reality\
\
the writing style also reflects the activity of the poem itself\
\
clockwork/mechanical motion--until love enters lust and shuts it down.  parallel to mortality entering art.\
mechanism of poem is stopped by moral expectations.\
poem grinds to a halt after love enters--just as dancing stops.\
\
distorted view--due to shadows--allegory of cave.\
violin causes loves entry--draw of beauty/attraction. \
\
\

\f0\b Poem #2 (p.874)\
In the Forest\
\

\f1\b0 Out of the mid-wood's twilight\
Into the meadow's dawn,\
Ivory limbed and brown-eyed,\
Flashes my Faun!\
\
He skips through the copses singing,\
And his shadow dances along,\
And I know not which I should follow,\
Shadow or song!\
\
O Hunter, snare me his shadow!\
O Nightingale, catch me his strain!\
Else moonstruck with music and madness\
I track him in vain! \
\
form: abcb\
\

\f0\b Misc:
\f1\b0 \
\
Perhaps use quote "The truth is rarely pure and never simple", "I can resist everything except temptation", "Experience is the name everyone give to their mistakes"\
Perhaps create a OW logo of some kind.\
\

\f0\b Critique: \

\f1\b0 Open perhaps with the quote "Literary criticism is not your forte, my dear fellow. Don't try it. You should leave that to people who haven't been at a University. They do it so well in the daily papers."\
 }